CME-288 Run tests on a FastAPI project in Harness CI (#2611)
harness/developer-hub: tutorials/ci-pipelines/test/ci-fastapi-test.md

---
sidebar_position: 4
description: Use Harness CI to run automated tests in a FastAPI project.
keywords: [Continuous Integration, CI Tutorial, FastAPI, Testing, Run Tests]
title: Test a FastAPI project
slug: /ci-pipelines/test/fastapi
---

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<ctabanner
  buttonText="Learn More"
  title="Continue your learning journey."
  tagline="Take a Continuous Integration Certification today!"
  link="/certifications/continuous-integration"
  closable={true}
  target="_self"
/>
```

This is a required metadata for the tutorials.

> # Introduction

Reviewer: This heading is not needed. The `title` is the first heading. If you want to provide a longer/different version of the title (like is done in the Codecov tutorial), then you can use H1 for that. Otherwise, no need for H1.

> [FastAPI](https://fastapi.tiangolo.com/) is a modern and highly performant web framework that allows developers to build APIs in Python 3.7+ using standard Python type hints. One of the most notable features of FastAPI is its impressive speed, which rivals that of popular frameworks such as NodeJS and Go. This is made possible thanks to the underlying Starlette and Pydantic libraries. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[FastAPI](https://fastapi.tiangolo.com/) is a modern and highly performant web framework that you can use to build APIs in Python 3.7+ using standard Python type hints. One of the most notable features of FastAPI is its impressive speed, which rivals that of popular frameworks such as NodeJS and Go. This is made possible by the underlying Starlette and Pydantic libraries. 
```

Try to write from second person ("you"). It is more personal and active.

> Using FastAPI can significantly increase the speed at which features are developed, with developers reporting a 200-300% increase in development speed. Additionally, FastAPI can help reduce the number of bugs in code by approximately 40%, making it a reliable choice for building complex web applications.

Reviewer: This paragraph is not really necessary. It sounds more like marketing for FastAPI. We want to focus on how you can use Harness CI and FastAPI together for maximum benefit.

Author: Sure

> In this article we’ll see how to run automated tests in a FastAPI project when new changes are pushed to the main branch of your repository using Harness CI module.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this tutorial, you'll use Harness CI to run automated tests in a FastAPI project when changes are pushed to the `main` branch of your repository.
```

> ## Pre-requisites

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Prerequisites
```

Make sure to look at the other tutorials as examples - No hyphen in prerequisites.

* Knowledge of Python and FastAPI.
* Git and GitHub basics.
* [A GitHub Account](https://github.com/join).
* [A Harness Account](https://app.harness.io/).

> 

Reviewer: ~~~suggestion

```mdx-code-block
import CISignupTip from '/tutorials/shared/ci-signup-tip.md';
```

<CISignupTip />

~~~

This is a required metadata element of the tutorials. It  loads a partial that prompts the reader to sign up for a free account.

> ## Setting up the pipeline in Harness CI

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Set up the pipeline
```

Our style guide avoids "-ing" phrases in headings.

Also, we can assume the pipeline is in Harness CI.

However, the content under this heading is not about setting up a harness pipeline it's about cloning the repo.

Let’s start with a FastAPI project to work with.

**Cloning the Project**

For this tutorial we already have a to-do REST API with sample test cases hosted in Harness Community [repository](https://github.com/harness-community/fastapi-harness-sample). Follow the following steps to run the project on your machine.

* [Fork the project](https://github.com/harness-community/fastapi-harness-sample) on GitHub with your account.
* Clone the forked repo to your machine.

Your cloned project should have the structure shown below:

```
├── .harness
│   ├── Pipeline.yaml
├── app
│   ├── main.py
│   ├── schemas.py
│   ├── util.py
│   ├── __init__.py
├── LICENSE
├── README.md
├── requirements.txt
└── test_main.py
```

**Some important files in the codebase:**

* fastapi-todo-tests/requirements.txt - contains a list of all the dependencies for  our project.
* fastapi-todo-tests/app/main.py - Implements three API endpoints for : creating a task, deleting a task, and getting a list of created tasks.
* fastapi-todo-tests/test_main.py - This file defines three test cases.

> ## Setting up the Project Locally

Reviewer: Does the user need to do this local setup? If this is not required for the Harness CI pipeline to work, I would either omit it, or put it inside a `<details>` and mark it as an optional exercise.

Author: This is not necessary for the pipeline to work.

* Uvicorn (uvicorn). An ASGI web server implementation for Python.

:::

* Create a virtual environment name test-env 

```mdx-code-block
import Tabs from '@theme/Tabs';
import TabItem from '@theme/TabItem';
```

```mdx-code-block
<Tabs>
  <TabItem value="linux or mac" label="Linux or MacOS">
```

```bash
python3 -m venv test-env
```

```mdx-code-block
  </TabItem>
  <TabItem value="windows" label="Windows" default>
```

```bash
python -m venv test-env
```

```mdx-code-block
  </TabItem>
</Tabs>
```

* Activate the virtual environment

```mdx-code-block
<Tabs>
  <TabItem value="linux or mac" label="Linux or MacOS">
```

```bash
source test-env/bin/activate
```

```mdx-code-block
  </TabItem>
  <TabItem value="windows" label="Windows" default>
```

```bash
.\test-env\Scripts\activate
```

```mdx-code-block
  </TabItem>
</Tabs>
```

* Install the dependencies

```bash
cd <project root>
pip install -r requirements.txt
```
* Run all the tests defined in the test_main.py file

```bash
pytest
```

* Start the development server

```bash
uvicorn app.main:app --reload
```

* Go to **localhost:8000/docs** on your browser to test things out in the local server.

> ## Create your pipeline
> 
> ### Modify the pipeline
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Create your pipeline

```

These headings are repetitive.

> 1. From the left pane, select **Pipelines**, then select **+ Create a Pipeline**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. From the left pane, select **Pipelines**, then select **Create a Pipeline**.
```

No need to include graphic/icons in UI labels, just the text part.

2. In the **Name** field, enter a name for your pipeline, then select **Start**.
3. Switch from the **Visual** view to the **YAML** view, and then select **Edit YAML**.

Append the following configuration:

```mdx-code-block
<Tabs>
  <TabItem value="Cloud" label="Cloud" default>
```

**Cloud** pipelines run in managed infrastructure provided by Harness.

```yaml
  properties:
    ci:
      codebase:
        connectorRef: GIT_CONNECTOR
        repoName: fastapi-harness-sample
        build: <+input>
  stages:
    - stage:
        name: test
        identifier: test
        type: CI
        spec:
          cloneCodebase: true
          platform:
            os: Linux
            arch: Amd64
          runtime:
            type: Cloud
            spec: {}
          execution:
            steps:
              - step:
                  type: Run
                  name: Install Dependencies
                  identifier: Install_Dependencies
                  spec:
                    shell: Sh

>                     command: |-

Reviewer: Harness Cloud has some software preinstalled on the images. Check the image specs to see if this is necessary. You might also want to look at the Python guide.

https://developer.harness.io/docs/continuous-integration/use-ci/set-up-build-infrastructure/use-harness-cloud-build-infrastructure#platforms-and-image-specifications

https://developer.harness.io/tutorials/ci-pipelines/build/python

                      sudo apt-get update && sudo apt-get install -y python3-dev && sudo apt-get install default-libmysqlclient-dev

                      pip install --cache-dir .pip_cache -r requirements.txt
                    reports:
                      type: JUnit
                      spec:
                        paths:
                          - output-test.xml
              - step:
                  type: Run
                  name: Run Pytest
                  identifier: Pytest
                  spec:
                    shell: Sh
                    command: |
                      pytest --junitxml=output-test.xml
                    reports:
                      type: JUnit
                      spec:
                        paths:
                          - output-test.xml

```

> ```mdx-code-block
>   </TabItem>
>   <TabItem value="kubernetes" label="Kubernetes">
> ```
> **Kubernetes** pipelines run in a Kubernetes cluster that you manage. Kubernetes pipelines are an enterprise feature.
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```mdx-code-block
  </TabItem>
  <TabItem value="selfhosted" label="Self-hosted">
```

This example uses a [Kubernetes cluster build infrastructure](docs/category/set-up-kubernetes-cluster-build-infrastructures).

```

We have Harness-hosted build infra (Harness Cloud) and multiple self-hosted options. Kubernetes is one of them.

```yaml
  properties:
    ci:
      codebase:

>         connectorRef: GIT_CONNECTOR

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        connectorRef: GIT_CONNECTOR
```

Take a look at the Terraform Notifications tutorial to see how it included all the preparatory steps (fork codebase, set up codebase connector, etc.) before showing the Run steps and full pipeline YAML:

https://developer.harness.io/tutorials/ci-pipelines/tfc-notification

Another good example is the CodeCov one where it is assumed that the user already has a pipeline that they're going to add Run step to:

https://developer.harness.io/tutorials/ci-pipelines/test/codecov

For a more bare bones tutorial, you could follow something like the Artifacts tab tutorial, but this tutorial still covers the components and links to associated docs.

https://developer.harness.io/tutorials/ci-pipelines/publish/artifacts-tab

              - step:
                  type: Run
                  name: Pytest
                  identifier: Pytest
                  spec:
                    shell: Sh
                    command: |
                      pytest --junitxml=output-test.xml
                    reports:
                      type: JUnit
                      spec:
                        paths:
                          - output-test.xml
          infrastructure:
            type: KubernetesDirect
            spec:
              connectorRef: Kubernetes_Connector
              namespace: <+pipeline.variables.KUBERNETES_NAMESPACE>
              automountServiceAccountToken: true
              nodeSelector: {}
              os: Linux
```

```mdx-code-block
  </TabItem>
</Tabs>
```

**Now let’s understand the pipeline snippet above:**

* Here we first created a single Builds stage and specified our infrastructure settings as Harness Cloud(OS: Linux & Architecture: AMD64) or Kubernetes

* We then configured the execution settings for the Builds stage and defined 4 steps: 
    * Install Dependencies: This step executes the command to install all the project dependencies from the requirements.txt file

>     * We then define & run the unit tests in the next step using pip & pytest command.

Reviewer: Put this before the YAML examples. You can duplicate it on each tab and modify the words for each build infra.

Also, each pipeline only has 2 steps even though they contain multiple actions.

> Now open the GitHub repository that you’ve already forked. Here you’ll notice that it automatically pushed the Harness CI pipeline under the .harness/ directory in the codebase.

Reviewer: I am not sure that this always happens. It happens if you enable the appropriate setting in the getting started flow, but it doesn't always happen.

Also, at the beginning, you stated that the tutorial would show how to "automatically" run tests when there are changes to the codebase. To do that, the tutorial needs to show the user how to setup a trigger.

I would instead replace this sentence and the following paragraph with something like:

```
Save and run your pipeline to run your FastAPI tests.

## Add the trigger

You can run this pipeline manually as it is. To automatically run tests whenever the codebase changes, you need to add a [Git event trigger](/docs/platform/Triggers/triggering-pipelines) that listens for pushes to the `main` branch of your code repo (or whichever repo you choose to track).

[follow with instructions to set up the webhook trigger that runs on push to `main`]
```

Author: Changes added. Needs to be reviewed.
